\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename elinks-lua.info
@settitle ELinks - Lua
@setchapternewpage none
@c %**end of header
     
@ifinfo
This file documents the Lua scripting interface of the ELinks web browser.
     
Copyright 2001, 2002  Peter Wang and others.
@end ifinfo
     
@titlepage
@title ELinks Lua extensions
@author Peter Wang
     
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2001, 2002  Peter Wang and others.
@end titlepage
     
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
     
@ifinfo
This file documents the Lua scripting interface of the ELinks web browser.
@end ifinfo
     
@menu
* Introduction::                What is is, where to get it
* Installing::                  How to compile and install it
* Using ELinks with Lua::       The main bit
* Example recipes::             The fun stuff
* Document history::            
@end menu


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Introduction, Installing, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

@section What is it

Lua scripting capabilities permit users to customize the ELinks behaviour to
unusual degree - they allow automatic rewriting of HTML code of the received
documents, rewriting of the URLs entered by user etc. You can even write your
own bookmarks system with Lua. See also contrib/lua/ for some examples of the
possibilities of ELinks Lua support.

Please do not confuse Lua scripting with JavaScript, EcmaScript, VBScript and
similiar. Those are embedded in page, allowing per-document scripting related
to its presentation and providing some degree of interactivity etc. On the
contrary, the current Lua support permits scripts to be embedded to the browser
directly, changing the behaviour of the browser, not the document.

The original Lua support (in the form of Links-Lua fork of original Links) was
written by Peter Wang and Cliff Cunnington.  There are some rough edges
remaining, but is suitable for everyday use (I have been using it every day for
a year).

@section Where to get it

The Lua scripting support comes with the stock ELinks distribution, no
additional patches and tweaks should be needed.

The web site of the original Links-Lua is at
@uref{http://links.sourceforge.net/links-lua/}.
Some older patches against regular Links are available at
@uref{http://www.sourceforge.net/projects/links/}, but they are not
being maintained.

@noindent
ELinks can be found at @uref{http://elinks.or.cz/}.

@noindent
Links can be found at @uref{http://links.browser.org/}.

@noindent
Lua can be found at @uref{http://www.lua.org/}.

@section What it runs on

The Lua support has only been tested under Linux, although it @emph{should}
work under other platforms that ELinks and Lua support (perhaps with some
changes to source code?).

Also, note that many of the scripts given here assume a Unix system.
Your mileage will definitely vary on other platforms.


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Installing, Using ELinks with Lua, Introduction, Top
@chapter Installing

@menu
* Installing Lua::
* Installing ELinks::
* Running ELinks with Lua::
@end menu


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Installing Lua, Installing ELinks, Installing, Installing
@section Installing Lua

Before you can compile ELinks with Lua support, you must compile and install
Lua.  The following instructions are for a Linux system.  People on other
systems should try to enable @code{popen} support, but this is not necessary
(you will lose a bit of functionality though).

@enumerate
@item Download and unpack the Lua @file{tar.gz} or @file{zip} somewhere.
@item @kbd{cd} into the @file{lua} directory.
@item Open @file{config} in a text editor and uncomment the @code{POPEN} line.
@item Optionally, change the @code{INSTALL_ROOT} line.
@item Run @kbd{make; make so; make sobin; make install}.  
On systems without shared object support, simply run @kbd{make; make
install} instead.
@end enumerate


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Installing ELinks, Running ELinks with Lua, Installing Lua, Installing
@section Installing ELinks

Follow the instructions for building ELinks (it is the standard
``./configure; make; make install'' procedure).  During the configure
step make sure that Lua has been detected on your system.


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Running ELinks with Lua, , Installing ELinks, Installing
@section Running ELinks with Lua

Simply start ELinks as you normally would.  To check you have Lua support
compiled in, open up the "Help | About" dialog box.  It should list
"Lua" under "Features".  If not, make sure you do not have other copies
of ELinks running, or start ELinks again with the "-no-connect" option on
the command-line.


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Using ELinks with Lua, Example recipes, Installing, Top
@chapter Using ELinks with Lua

Out of the box, ELinks with Lua will do nothing different from regular ELinks.
You need to write some scripts.

@menu
* ELinks Lua additions::        
* Config file::                 
* Hooks::                       
* Functions::                   
* User protocol::               
@end menu


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node ELinks Lua additions, Config file, Using ELinks with Lua, Using ELinks with Lua
@section ELinks Lua additions

The Lua support is based on the idea of @dfn{hooks}.  A hook is a function that
gets called at a particular point during the execution of ELinks.  To make
ELinks do what you want, you can add and edit such hooks.

The Lua support also adds an extra dialog box, which you can open while in
ELinks with the comma (@kbd{,}) key.  Here you can enter Lua expressions for
evaluation, or override it to do something different.

And finally, you can bind keystrokes to Lua functions.  These keystrokes
won't let you do any more than is possible with the Lua Console, but
they're more convenient.

Note that this document assumes you have some knowledge of programming in Lua.
For that, you should refer to the Lua reference manual
(@uref{http://www.lua.org/docs.html}). In fact, the language is relatively
trivial, though. You could already do wonders with simply refactoring the
example scripts.


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Config file, Hooks, ELinks Lua additions, Using ELinks with Lua
@section Config file

On startup, ELinks reads in two Lua scripts.  Firstly, a system-wide
configuration file called @file{/etc/elinks/hooks.lua}, then a file in
your home directory called @file{~/.elinks/hooks.lua}.  From these files,
you can include other Lua files with @code{dofile}, if necessary.

To see what kind of things you should put in here, look at
@file{contrib/lua/hooks.lua}.


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Hooks, Functions, Config file, Using ELinks with Lua
@section Hooks

The following hooks are available.

@deffn Hook goto_url_hook (url, current_url)
This hook is called when the user enters a string into the "Go to URL"
dialog box.  It is given the string entered, and the current URL (which
may be @code{nil}).  It should return a string, which is the URL that
Links should follow, or @code{nil} to cancel the operation.
@end deffn

@deffn Hook follow_url_hook (url)
This hook is passed the URL that Links is about to follow.  It should
return a string (the URL modified or unmodified), or @code{nil} to stop
Links following the URL.
@end deffn

@deffn Hook pre_format_html_hook (url, html)
This hook gets called just before the final time an HTML document is
formatted, i.e. it only gets called once, after the entire document is
downloaded.  It will be passed the URL and HTML text as strings, and
should return the modified HTML text, or @code{nil} if there were no
modifications.
@end deffn

@deffn Hook lua_console_hook (string)
This hook is passed the string that the user entered into the "Lua
Console" dialog box.  It should return two values: the type of action to
take (@samp{"run"}, @samp{"eval"}, @samp{"goto-url"} or @code{nil}), and
a second argument, which is the shell command to run or the Lua
expression to evaluate.

Examples:
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{return "run", "someprogram"}
will attempt to run the program @file{someprogram}.

@item @code{return "eval", "somefunction(1+2)"}
will attempt to call the Lua function @code{somefunction} with an
argument, 3.

@item @code{return "goto-url", "http://www.bogus.com"}
will ask Links to visit the URL "http://www.bogus.com".

@item @code{return nil}
will do nothing.
@end itemize
@end deffn

@deffn Hook quit_hook ()
This hook is run just before Links quits.  It is useful for cleaning up
things, such as temporary files you have created.
@end deffn


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Functions, User protocol, Hooks, Using ELinks with Lua
@section Functions

As well as providing hooks, ELinks provides some functions in addition to the
standard Lua functions.

@deffn Function enable_systems_functions ()
Enable some potentially dangerous functions, as well as some other
functions which were unfortunate enough to be lumped in the same group.

The functions are: @code{openfile}, @code{closefile}, @code{readfrom},
@code{writeto}, @code{appendto}, @code{pipe_read}, @code{remove},
@code{rename}, @code{flush}, @code{seek}, @code{tmpname}, @code{read},
@code{write} @code{execute}, @code{exit}, @code{clock}, @code{date},
@code{getenv}, @code{setlocale}.

Note: @code{setlocale} is a standard Lua function and will not affect
the current ELinks locale.
@end deffn

@deffn Function current_url ()
Returns the URL of the current page being shown (in the ELinks session
that invoked the function).
@end deffn

@deffn Function current_link ()
Returns the URL of the currently selected link, or @code{nil} if none is
selected.
@end deffn

@deffn Function current_title ()
Returns the title of the current page, or @code{nil} if none.
@end deffn

@deffn Function current_document ()
Returns the current document as a string, unformatted.
@end deffn

@deffn Function current_document_formatted ([width])
Returns the current document, formatted for the specified screen width.
If the width is not specified, then the document is formatted for the
current screen width (i.e. what you see on screen).  Note that this
function does @emph{not} guarantee all lines will be shorter than
@var{width}, just as some lines may be wider than the screen when
viewing documents online.
@end deffn

@deffn Function pipe_read (command)
Executes @var{command} and reads in all the data from stdout, until
there is no more.  This is a hack, because for some reason the standard
Lua function @code{read} seems to crash ELinks when used in pipe-reading
mode.
@end deffn

@deffn Function execute (string)
Executes shell commands @var{string} and returns the exit code.  Beware
that you must not read or write to stdin and stdout.  And unlike the
standard Lua function of the same name, the return value is meaningless.
@end deffn

@deffn Function bind_key (keymap, keystroke, function)
Currently, @var{keymap} must be the string @samp{"main"}.  Keystroke is
a keystroke as you would write it in the ELinks config file
@file{~/.links/user.cfg}.  The function @var{function} should take no
arguments, and should return the same values as @code{lua_console_hook}.
@end deffn


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node User protocol,  , Functions, Using ELinks with Lua
@section User protocol

There is one more little thing which Links-Lua adds, which will not be
described in detail here.  It is the fake "user:" protocol, which can be
used when writing your own addons.  It allows you to generate web pages
containing links to "user://blahblah", which can be intercepted by the
@code{follow_url_hook} (among other things) to perform unusual actions.
For a concrete example, see the bookmark addon.


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Example recipes, Document history, Using ELinks with Lua, Top
@chapter Example recipes

This chapter contains some example scripts that you can use.  All of them come
from @file{contrib/lua/hooks.lua}.  I really recommend you to see it directly
instead of copying code out of this document.  Also, not everything in there is
covered here.

If you would like to contribute scripts, that would be great!  Please
send them to me at @email{tjaden@@users.sourceforge.net}.  Cliff and I plan to
start a script repository, provided we get some contributions.  As for
script ideas, you'll just have to be a little creative :-)

Also take a look at the @file{contrib/lua/} directory in the ELinks
distribution. Note that Peter and Cliff don't maintain the Lua support
intensively anymore, thus it would be probably nice to Cc me
(@email{pasky@@ucw.cz}) if you want to contribute some patch, so that I would
be able to add it to the ELinks distribution.


@menu
* Go to URL on steroids::       
* Expanding ~::                 Expanding ~ to your home directory
* Filtering crap::              Removing unwanted "content"
* Reading gzipped files::       
* Printing::                    Directly from ELinks
* Deferring to Netscape::       As a last resort
* Alternative bookmark system::  
* More ideas::                  
@end menu


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Go to URL on steroids, Expanding ~, Example recipes, Example recipes
@section Go to URL on steroids

There are some web sites that I visit often.  Bookmarks are okay, but
they are separate from the "Go to URL" dialog box, so I keep forgetting
to use them.  Also, when I visit a search engine home page, all I really
want to do is enter a search term.

The following script allows me to type certain strings into the "Go to
URL" dialog box, and it will convert them to the URL I actually want to
visit.  As a bonus, it allows me perform some searches on sites like
Google without loading up the front page first.

@example

function match (prefix, url)
    return strsub (url, 1, strlen (prefix)) == prefix
end

function strip (str)
    return gsub (str, "^%s*(.-)%s*$", "%1")
end

function plusify (str)
    return gsub (str, "%s", "+")
end

function goto_url_hook (url, current_url)
    -- Google search (e.g. ,gg unix browsers).
    if match (",gg", url) then
        url = plusify (strip (strsub (url, 4)))
        return "http://www.google.com/search?q="..url.."&btnG=Google+Search"
 
    -- Freshmeat search.
    elseif match (",fm", url) then
        url = plusify (strip (strsub (url, 4)))
        return "http://www.freshmeat.net/search/?q="..url

    -- Appwatch search (e.g. ,aw lynx).
    elseif match (",aw", url) then
        url = plusify (strip (strsub (url, 4)))
        return "http://www.appwatch.com/Linux/Users/find?q="..url
    
    -- Dictionary.com search (e.g. ,dict congenial).
    elseif match (",dict", url) then
        url = plusify (strip (strsub (url, 6)))
        return "http://www.dictionary.com/cgi-bin/dict.pl?db=%2A&term="..url

    -- RPM search (e.g. ,rpm links).
    elseif match (",rpm", url) then
        url = plusify (strip (strsub (url, 5)))
        return "http://www.rpmfind.net/linux/rpm2html/search.php?query="
                ..url.."&submit=Search+..."
        
    -- Netcraft.com search (e.g. ,whatis www.google.com).
    elseif match (",whatis", url) then
        url = plusify (strip (strsub (url, 8)))
        return "http://uptime.netcraft.com/up/graph/?host="..url

    -- LinuxToday home page.
    elseif match (",lt", url) then
        return "http://linuxtoday.com/"

    -- Weather forecast for Melbourne, Australia.
    elseif match (",forecast", url) then
        return "http://www.bom.gov.au/cgi-bin/wrap_fwo.pl?IDF02V00.txt"

    -- Unmatched
    else
        return url
    end
end

@end example

(Note that this was noticably enhanced and rewritten in the ELinks standart
hooks.)


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Expanding ~, Filtering crap, Go to URL on steroids, Example recipes
@section Expanding ~

By adding an extra snippet of code to the previous example, we can make
ELinks expand pathnames such as @file{~/foo/bar} and @file{~user/zappo},
like in the shell and other Unix programs.

@example

-- Home directory: If you do not enable system functions, you will need
-- to set the following to your home directory.

home_dir = (getenv and getenv ("HOME")) or "/home/MYSELF"


function goto_url_hook (url, current_url)
                .
                .

    -- Expand ~ to home directories.
    elseif match ("~", url) then
        if strsub(url, 2, 2) == "/" then    -- ~/foo
            return home_dir..strsub(url, 2)
        else                                -- ~foo/bar
            return "/home/"..strsub(url, 2)
        end

                .
                .

@end example


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Filtering crap, Reading gzipped files, Expanding ~, Example recipes
@section Filtering crap

Many web pages nowadays have columns to the left and right of the text, which
are utterly useless.  If you happen to be viewing the page in a 80x25 screen,
the text you want to read ends up crammed into a tiny space in the centre.  We
use ELinks Lua support to manipulate the HTML before it reaches the parser.


@subsection linuxtoday.com

Note: This recipe is out of date.

Linux Today has two problems when viewed in ELinks: the useless columns
on the left and the right and all the text appears in cyan.  Here is a
quick recipe to fix that:

@example

-- Plain strfind (no metacharacters)
function sstrfind (s, pattern)
    return strfind (s, pattern, 1, 1)
end

function pre_format_html_hook (url, html)
    -- Strip the left and right columns from Linux Today pages
    -- and change the font colour to white.
    if sstrfind (url, "linuxtoday.com") then
        if sstrfind (url, "news_story") then
            html = gsub (html, '<TABLE CELLSPACING="0".-</TABLE>', '', 1)
            html = gsub (html, '<TR BGCOLOR="#FFF.-</TR></TABLE>', '', 1)
        else
            html = gsub (html, 'WIDTH="120">\n<TR.+</TABLE></TD>', '>', 1)
        end
        html = gsub (html, '<A HREF="http://www.internet.com.-</A>', '')
        html = gsub (html, "<IFRAME.-</IFRAME>", "")
        -- emphasis in text is lost
        return gsub (html, 'text="#002244"', 'text="#001133"', 1)
    end

    return nil
end

@end example


@subsection linuxgames.com

Here is a simpler example, for @uref{http://www.linuxgames.com/}.

@example

function pre_format_html_hook (url, html)
                .
                .

    elseif strfind (url, "linuxgames.com", 1, 1) then
        return gsub (html, "<CENTER>.-</center>", "", 1)

                .
                .

@end example


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Reading gzipped files, Printing, Filtering crap, Example recipes
@section Reading gzipped files

Note: ELinks already supports gzipped files natively.

Sometimes documents come gzipped in order to save space, but then you
need to uncompress them to read them with ELinks.  Here is a recipe to
handle gzipped files on a Unix system.

@example

-- This script requires system functions.

function pre_format_html_hook (url, html)
                .
                .

    -- Handle gzip'd files within reasonable size.
    if strfind (url, "%.gz$") and strlen (html) < 65536 then
        local tmp = tmpname ()
        writeto (tmp) write (html) writeto ()
        html = pipe_read ("(gzip -dc "..tmp.." || cat "..tmp..") 2>/dev/null")
        remove (tmp)
        return html
    end

                .
                .

@end example


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Printing, Deferring to Netscape, Reading gzipped files, Example recipes
@section Printing

Printing a web page with ELinks usually involves quite a few steps: Save
the current document onto disk.  Run it through ELinks on the
command-line (so it fits into 80 columns) to generate a plain text
version.  Remove the 80th column from the text version, as it will make
printers wrap down to the next line.  Finally, run the processed file
through `lpr', then delete it.

The following functions allow you to print web pages directly from
ELinks, using `lpr' or `enscript'.  Type @kbd{lpr()} or @kbd{enscript()}
in the Lua Console to run them.  (In the @file{hooks.lua}, I have also
made it so you can just type @kbd{lpr} or @kbd{enscript}.)

@example

-- This script requires system functions.

function catto (output)
    writeto (output)
    write (current_document_formatted (79))
    writeto ()
end

-- Send the current document to `lpr'.
function lpr ()
    -- You must compile Lua with `popen' support for pipes to work.
    -- See `config' in the Lua distribution.
    catto ("|lpr")
end

-- Send the current document to `enscript'.
function enscript ()
    catto ("|enscript -fCourier8")
end

@end example


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Deferring to Netscape, Alternative bookmark system, Printing, Example recipes
@section Deferring to Netscape

If you come across a brain-dead web page that is totally unreadable with
ELinks, you'd probably want to open it with a graphical browser.  The
following function opens the current document in Netscape.

@example

-- This function requires `execute', a system function.

-- When starting Netscape: Set to `nil' if you do not want
-- to open a new window for each document.
netscape_new_window = 1

-- Open current document in Netscape.
function netscape ()
    local new = netscape_new_window and ",new_window" or ""
    execute ("( netscape -remote 'openURL("..current_url ()..new..")'"
             .." || netscape '"..current_url ().."' ) 2>/dev/null &")
end

@end example


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Alternative bookmark system, More ideas, Deferring to Netscape, Example recipes
@section Alternative bookmark system

Many people would like to have a bookmark system with categories (note that
ELinks already supports that, marketing name Hiearchical bookmarks), and also
to be able to view them and search for them in an HTML page.  I have written an
alternative bookmark system (for ELinks), which some people may like better
than the standard bookmark system.  

It is quite a big addon, so is described in a separate document, here:
@uref{bookmark.html}


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node More ideas,  , Alternative bookmark system, Example recipes
@section More ideas

@itemize @bullet

@item
The Lua interface needs to be redesigned to provide more flexible, coherent
and usable interface to the scripts.

@item
Cliff Cunnington had a neat idea of clipping text that you see in web
pages (you enter a regexp that will match the start and end of the text
you want to clip), and saving the text to disk, along with the URL and
timestamp.  This would help if you find that you can't ever remember
where you had seen a piece of text, or if you want to keep a piece of
information but don't need to save the entire page.

@item
People who use download management programs could write a function to
send the current link to their favourite downloading program.

@item
If you wrote a small C program to put text into the X11 selection
clipboard, you could pass the current link or URL to that program, to
make it easier to paste URLs into other windows.  It might be possible
to do the same with GPM, or the KDE/GNOME equivalents.

@item
Send the current page to Babelfish for translation.

@item
Look for stupid JavaScript URLs and convert them to something usable.

@item
More things are possible, I'm sure.  If you have an idea that requires another
hook or function, contact me (Peter Wang) and I'll see what I can do.

@end itemize


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Document history,  , Example recipes, Top
@chapter Document history

$Id: elinks-lua.texi,v 1.2.22.2 2005/04/05 20:23:41 jonas Exp $

Current history:

$Log: elinks-lua.texi,v $
Revision 1.2.22.2  2005/04/05 20:23:41  jonas
Sync the documentation updates.

Revision 1.3  2005/01/13 13:20:07  jonas
Fix nodes so makeinfo don't choke on it.

Revision 1.2  2002/11/29 13:08:27  pasky
ELinksified.


Original history:

@itemize @bullet
@item 2002-11-29
ELinksified the document as I (pasky) included it in the ELinks distribution
*finally* ;-).

@item 2002-05-11
Times change, stuff to update :-) The main thing is that ELinks came
along.

@item 2001-07-04
Updated for Links-Lua 0.96 patch 11.

@item 2001-05-12
Updated for Links-Lua patch 11.

@item 2001-05-07
Added keystrokes to "Links-Lua additions".

@item 2001-05-05
Updated for Links-Lua patch 10.

@item 2001-04-20
Added Babelfish and JavaScript ideas.

@item 2001-04-19
Added section on "Running Links-Lua", a couple more script ideas, listed
the system functions I missed, and some minor things.

@item 2001-04-15
First Links-Lua public release.  This document was started a few days
before that.
@end itemize


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@contents
@bye
